Eker, S., et al. (2023). Full of Economic-Environment Linkages and Integration dX/dt (FeliX): Technical Model Documentation.
	
Eker, S., G. Reese and M. Obersteiner (2019). "Modelling the drivers of a widespread shift to sustainable diets." Nature Sustainability 2: 725-735.
	A reduction in global meat consumption can significantly reduce the adverse environmental effects of the food system, but it would require widespread dietary changes. Such shifts to sustainable diets depend on several behavioural factors that have not yet been addressed in relation to the food system. This study links a behavioural diet shift model to an integrated assessment model to identify the main drivers of global diet change and its implications for the food system. The results show that the social norm effect (for instance, the extent of vegetarianism in the population that accelerates a further switch to a vegetarian diet) and self-efficacy are the main drivers of widespread dietary changes. These findings stress the importance of value-driven actions motivated either by intrinsic identity or by group dynamics over health and climate risk perceptions in steering diet change dynamics.

Kuhn M, et al. (2023). Global systems analysis for understanding the drivers of sustainable wellbeing. Systems Analysis for Sustainable Wellbeing. 50 years of IIASA research, 40 years after the Brundtland Commission, contributing to the post-2030 Global Agenda. Lutz W and Pachauri S. Laxenburg, Austria, IIASA: 61-76.
	
Liu, Q., et al. (2023). "Robust strategies to end global poverty and reduce environmental pressures." One Earth 6(4): 392-408.
	Summary Eradicating extreme poverty everywhere by 2030 has proved to be challenging. Uplifting millions out of poverty might lead to exceeding the Earth’s environmental boundaries. Using a global integrated assessment model, we assess the effectiveness of 900 strategies under 25 socioeconomic settings in eliminating poverty and quantify their impacts on the Earth system by 2050. Our reference scenario, which follows a post-pandemic economic trend with an annual economic growth rate of 2.05%, projects an extreme poverty rate of 7.34% (uncertainty range 6.29%–8.73%) in 2030. Even under optimistic settings, it may take over two decades to eradicate extreme poverty. Focusing more on environmental drivers of poverty and following historical trends in fiscal policies and social safety nets, we identified two robust strategies characterized by ambitious educational attendance, sustainable dietary choices, low fossil fuel consumption and energy demand, and low fertilizer use, which offset negative environmental effects without compromising the poverty eradication gains.

Liu, Q., et al. (2023). "Robust sensitivity analysis to uncertainties in environmental and socio-economic scenarios: A perspective from a global socio-ecological system model." Journal of Cleaner Production 410: 137244.
	Uncertainties exist in modelling and simulating complex socio-ecological systems due to unknown, unmeasurable, and uncontrollable occurrence probabilities of future conditions, which are often expressed through multiple representative future scenarios. The sensitivities of uncertain scenario parameters that comprise these scenarios may be different under different scenarios. To largely reduce unnecessary efforts of refining insensitive parameters, it is helpful to identify scenario parameters that remain sensitive in all plausible future scenarios. Based on a well-established global socio-ecological system model—Functional Enviro-economic Linkages Integrated neXus (FeliX), this study conducted robust sensitivity analyses of the scenario parameters that defined five representative environmental and socio-economic scenarios. The study explored their sensitivities on eco-environmental carrying capacity represented by six planetary boundary (PB) indicators. A three-step method was proposed for these analyses. First, an uncertainty analysis was adopted to explore the impacts of uncertain scenario parameters on PB indicators in each scenario using the Latin hypercube sampling and nonparametric Kruskal-Wallis test. Second, a sensitivity analysis was utilized to quantify the global sensitivity of each parameter using the Extended Fourier Transform Sensitivity Test (eFAST). Third, we conducted a robust sensitivity analysis and identified 12 common sensitive parameters that remained sensitive under all five scenarios by combining the eFAST's results according to four decision criteria representing different decision preferences. This study provides a better understanding of the sensitivity of scenario parameters on PB indicators influenced by future uncertainties across five representative scenarios in a complex socio-ecological system modelled by FeliX. The findings make it easier to improve and apply FeliX or other socio-ecological system models by focusing on key parameters and understanding important linkages of sectors in socio-ecological systems.

Moallemi, E. A., et al. (2022). "Early systems change necessary for catalyzing long-term sustainability in a post-2030 agenda." One Earth 5(7): 792-811.
	Summary Progress to date toward the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) has fallen short of expectations and is unlikely to fully meet 2030 targets. Past assessments have mostly focused on short- and medium-term evaluations, thus limiting the ability to explore the longer-term effects of systemic interactions with time lags and delay. Here we undertake global systems modeling with a longer-term view than previous assessments in order to explore the drivers of sustainability progress and how they could play out by 2030, 2050, and 2100 under different development pathways and quantitative targets. We find that early planning for systems change to shift from business as usual to more sustainable pathways is important for accelerating progress toward increasingly ambitious targets by 2030, 2050, and 2100. These findings indicate the importance of adopting longer-term timeframes and pathways to ensure that the necessary pre-conditions are in place for sustainability beyond the current 2030 Agenda.

Moallemi, E. A., et al. (2022). "Diversifying models for analysing global change scenarios and sustainability pathways." Global Sustainability 5: e7.
	Non-technical summary Models are increasingly used to inform the transformation of human–Earth systems towards a sustainable future, aligned with the sustainable development goals (SDGs). We argue that a greater diversity of models ought to be used for sustainability analysis to better address complexity and uncertainty. We articulate the steps to model global change socioeconomic and climatic scenarios with new models. Through these steps, we generate new scenario projections using a human–Earth system dynamics model. Our modelling brings new insights about the sensitivity of sustainability trends to future uncertainty and their alignment with or divergence from previous model-based scenario projections. Technical summary The future uncertainty and complexity of alternative socioeconomic and climatic scenarios challenge the model-based analysis of sustainable development. Obtaining robust insights requires a systematic processing of uncertainty and complexity not only in input assumptions, but also in the diversity of model structures that simulates the multisectoral dynamics of human and Earth system interactions. Here, we implement the global change scenarios, that is, the shared socioeconomic pathways and the representative concentration pathways, in a feedback-rich, integrated assessment model (IAM) of human–Earth system dynamics, called FeliX, to serve two aims: (1) to provide modellers with well-defined steps for the adoption of established scenarios in new IAMs and (2) to explore the impacts of model uncertainty and its structural complexity on the projection of these scenarios for sustainable development. Our modelling shows internally consistent scenario storylines across sectors, yet with quantitatively different realisations of these scenarios compared to other IAMs due to the new model's structural complexity. The results highlight the importance of enumerating global change scenarios and their uncertainty exploration with a diversity of models of different input assumptions and structures to capture a wider variety of future possibilities and sustainability indicators. Social media summary New study highlights the importance of global change scenario analysis with new, SDG-focused IAMs.

Obersteiner, M., et al. (2012). Valuing the potential impacts of GEOSS: a systems dynamics approach. The Value of Information, Springer: 67-90.
	
Ruan, W., et al. (2023). "Assessing the progress toward achieving energy- and climate-related sustainable development goals under four global energy transition outlooks." Sustainable Development n/a(n/a).
	Abstract Climate change is one of the greatest challenges in achieving the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), underscoring the critical need for energy transitions to mitigate the climate crisis. The achievement of two energy- and climate-focused SDGs—SDG 7 (affordable and clean energy) and SDG 13 (climate action)—remains uncertain under potential future global energy transition outlooks. This study evaluates the progress toward achieving SDGs 7 and 13 by 2050 under four representative energy transition outlooks through 14 performance indicators derived from a global system dynamics model. Our results reveal a progressive trend in achieving SDGs 7 and 13 under these energy transition outlooks. The overall progress scores toward these two SDGs are estimated as 16.23% in 2030 and 20.06% in 2050 under the most conservative outlook and 65.35% in 2030 and 88.24% in 2050 under the most radical outlook. Although energy transitions contribute to achieving SDGs 7 and 13, our analysis indicates that the world is far off-track in achieving these SDGs by relying solely on the implementation of energy transition policies. We further suggest promising measures from both the energy sector and other vital sectors to facilitate progress toward achieving the two SDGs.

Rydzak, F., M. Obersteiner and F. Kraxner (2010). "Impact of Global Earth Observation-Systemic view across GEOSS societal benefit area." International Journal of Spatial Data Infrastructures Research: 216-243.
	
Rydzak, F., et al. (2013). FeliX3 – Impact Assessment Model: Systemic view across Societal Benefit Areas beyond Global Earth Observation. Laxenburg, International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA).
	
Walsh, B., et al. (2017). "Pathways for balancing CO2 emissions and sinks." Nature Communications 8: 14856.
	
Walsh, B. J., et al. (2015). "New feed sources key to ambitious climate targets." Carbon balance and management 10(1): 26.
	
Yang, J., et al. (2023). "Assessing environmental impacts of response strategies for sustainable food system transformation." Sustainable Development n/a(n/a).
	Abstract The global food system is recognized as the largest source of pressure on the Earth's stability, and there is a pressing need for a swift global transformation toward a sustainable food system, which is also crucial for achieving the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and the Paris Agreement goals. While various response strategies have been developed to achieve the sustainable food system, it remains unclear how different response strategies and their combinations interactively affect global environmental functions. Here, we use a system dynamics-based integrated assessment model to quantitatively assess the effects of five representative response strategies, which are well-recognized to be potential for achieving a sustainable food system, and their combinations on the global environment. We use six boundary indicators, corresponding to six key Earth system processes and indicating the safe-operating spaces of the global food system, to define the global environmental performance. Our results show that the effects of response strategies may have a synergistic effect or counterbalance. While some individual strategies are sufficient to maintain certain boundary indicators within their safe zones, only the combination of all strategies can simultaneously prevent all boundary indicators from entering high-risk zones. More coordinated solutions within and outside the global food system are required to restore all boundary indicators to their safe zones.

